OK, this is an interview with Dr. Jim Adams by
Matthew Moran on the 20th of April 1993 at Cref
Brazos Baptist Association concerning the
effect of the civil rights movement on the
Southern Baptist Church. Dr. Adams, I'm asking
you to donate this tape to me or to the Texas A&M oral
history collection in the university archives.
Is that all right with you? That's fine. Thank you.
OK, Dr. Adams, where were you born? I was born in
Temple, Texas in 1929. OK. And did you grow up in
Temple also? No. My father was a railroad
engineer, was working in Palestine, Texas
shortly thereafter. And I grew up in Palestine in
East Texas. Where did you go to college? Went to
Baylor University. OK. What years did you attend?
I was in Baylor 1948 through 1952. And where did you
go to seminary? Went to seminary in Fort Worth,
Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary,
Fort Worth, Texas. In what years did you attend
seminary? I was in seminary in 1952 through 1956
the first time. Okay. Where were you living in the
1960s? In the 1960s, I was living in South Houston,
Texas, and then Victoria, Texas. Okay, what was
your position in the church? I was pastor of First
Baptist Church, South Houston, Texas, and pastor
of First Baptist Church, Victoria, Texas. Okay,
what was the ethnic breakdown of the communities,
first in Houston and then in Victoria? In Houston,
South Houston, South Houston is an independent
city, though a suburb area of Houston, and the
ethnic breakdown makeup of the community was
largely Anglo and Hispanic. Okay, what about in
Victoria? In Victoria, largely Anglo with a very
good-sized Hispanic community and a smaller
black community. Okay, what was ethnic breakdown
of the church? In South Houston, we had a few
Most of the Hispanic people were in a mission that
our church sponsored on the east side of the town.
So was that mission 100% Hispanic then? Some of our
Anglo people from our church worked in the
mission.
So I would say that it was probably 98% Hispanic.
What about the pastor of that mission? He was
Hispanic. He was Hispanic, too? Uh-huh. OK, how
would you characterize the race relations in the
church. Race relations in the South Houston
church with the mission people was good. And as I
said, occasionally we did have some Hispanic
people who were in our congregation too. I cannot
recall any problems, but by the large, they were
two separate congregations, of course. What
about in Victoria? What was the ethnic breakdown
of the church there? Our church was largely Anglo.
We did have a number of Hispanic children who
attended our church. And we had one black member in
the church in Victoria while I was there. Was there
any mission church in Victoria? Yes, there was a
Hispanic mission. There was no black mission.
There were two or three very strong black
congregations in the city, and we had very good
relationships with them. Were they Southern
Baptist churches? No, the black congregations
were not Southern Baptist. As I recall, the
predominant or the largest black congregation
was the National Baptist Church. Okay, and they
had black pastors? Yes.
How would you characterize the Southern Baptist
Convention and their position on race relations
within the church. The convention position,
and I think I'm correct in this, was that our
churches needed to do more to establish better
racial relations and to be more open to other
racial groups becoming a part of churches that
were largely Anglo churches in those days. Okay.
So what was the role of minorities in the church?
Was it mainly just membership in the church? Or did
they assume a more active role? Well, the
minorities were such minorities that they did not
have a great effect in the church, as I recall. The
Hispanic community and South Houston was very
small. The one black member that we had in Victoria
was very active in the church choir. Okay. How did
the other people view that black member in
Victoria? There was no problem whatsoever in the
church in Victoria. If there had been a larger
segment of another racial group, it might have
been different, but with a black member who
happened to be a lady, there was no problem at all.
Do you think it would have been different had that
black member been a man? I don't think so, no. Okay.
Did any black churches in that time fall under the
domain of the Southern Baptist Convention? There
were a few black churches during that time. I
recall, I believe I'm correct, there was one
church in Corpus Christi that affiliated with the
Southern Baptist Convention. Of course, since
then, there have been large numbers of black
congregations that have affiliated with the
Southern Baptist Convention. Okay, and those
black churches then had black pastors too? Yes.
Were there any minority congregations with white
pastors?
I was not aware of any in either of those two
communities during those years, no. What about
white congregations with black or Hispanic
pastors? I don't recall any. How did the church and
Southern Baptist Convention view black
ministers who led the civil rights movement such
as Martin Luther King? I think probably that would
depend on individuals within the churches as well
as individual pastors and in the way that they
looked at the civil rights movement. There was
still in those days a good amount of prejudice, but
I would say by the large,
I'd say probably most of the pastors were
sympathetic to the civil rights movement. There
were some things that happened that they probably
didn't like, as oftentimes happen when change is
occurring like that. What would you say were some
of those things that they didn't like? Oh, I have an
idea that there was still a racial or color
prejudice among some of the people. And some of
them felt like that, well, you know, it was the
right thing to do, but they were moving too fast.
Some of them may have had that attitude. Of course,
if they had been in the minority group, they
wouldn't have felt that way probably. Right. How
did the Ku Klux Klan affect the church? I cannot
recall either in Houston or in Victoria that the
Klan was... active in those communities during
the time that I was pastor there. Did you ever hear
of any experiences where the Klan had affected
another church? Primarily just in news articles,
reading about it, or perhaps on television. Okay.
Kneel-ins, where people would kneel in
segregated churches, grew in popularity in the
1960s. Were there any kneel-ins that you
encountered? No, I do not recall any. Did you ever
hear of any that had happened at all? No. After I
left Victoria, this was getting on into the 70s,
though, it was the end of the 60s, when I moved from
Victoria to a church in Texarkana. There had been
two churches that had been set on fire in
Texarkana, and as I went to the church where I
served in Texarkana, which was the Beach Street
First Baptist Church on the Arkansas side, the
church had been actively raising funds to help
rebuild the two black churches that had been
burned. Who burned the churches down? I'm not sure
they ever found out who did. Did you find a
difference in race relations between Arkansas
and Texas?
Perhaps a little. There may have been a bit more
prejudice at that time. Of course, when you move
from Victoria, which is in South Texas, it's
different. And when you come across East Texas and
on into Arkansas, there probably was more
prejudice in East Texas and in Arkansas than there
was in South Texas, for instance. What would you
say accounted for that? I think historical
location. and the fact that in East Texas and
Arkansas, there were a larger segment of black
people than there had been in South Texas. But the
attitude of the people in Texarkana at the time
that I went there, I felt like, was a very good
attitude, not a bad attitude. Do you think that it
changed dramatically since, say, the early 60s in
that area?
the school issue up there and so on. And I'm sure
that filtered down to all the other communities in
Arkansas. But yes, I think there was a better
attitude by then. Okay, the Civil Rights Act of
1964 granted blacks equal access to all public
facilities. Churches, private institutions,
however, what effect did the Civil Rights Act of
1964 have on the church? I doubt that it had very
much effect on the church at all. In fact, I think
there were already some churches that were
responding and opening their doors to blacks,
although there were many, many sad to say that had
not done so and that quite frankly still do not do
so. So there was a great deal of segregation at that
time? In the churches? Yes. Yes. Yes, there was.
How did the church in the Southern Baptist
Convention justify the segregation? I don't
think they justified it. I can't recall any
denominational leadership justifying it, and I
personally never did justify it. In fact, in the
churches where I pastored, I preached and shared
with the people and sought to lead them in the
direction of realizing that In a Christian
institution, there was no difference. God
certainly saw no difference. And that we needed to
begin to change our attitudes and realize that all
people were welcome in God's house. Right. How
did, was it just then by like a tradition or what was
expected that the blacks went to the black church
and whites went to the white church? Or was there
some kind of movement forcing the whites into the
white church and the blacks forcing the blacks
away from the white church. No, I think it was
traditionally what happened over the years after
the end of slavery. Of course, in those days, black
people were members of white churches. Slaves
were members of the churches where their masters
were. And after freedom, why, there came a gradual
segregation that I guess whites helped and blacks
also probably contributed to. It was And by the
60s, it was sort of a traditional thing. There were
black churches and white churches. A lot of the
people had never stopped to think about it,
really. That's just the way it was in the
community. So were there a great deal of
integrated churches then at that time also? Now,
which time are you talking about? In the 60s. In the
60s. Did that integration work? No, there were not
a large number of integrated churches, not in the
communities where are even later in Texarkana.
But with the passing of time, I think there was a
changing of attitude. I know that our people in, of
course, in Victoria, we did have a black member and
could have had others had they wanted to come. In
Texarkana, it was a little bit different. But we
did have blacks visit at the services from time to
time, though we never did have any that joined the
church in Texarkana. Do you think that the blacks
felt welcome in the church? I know that you tried to
make them feel welcome. I'm not sure that they did
feel welcome. Some of them probably did. While
there were others that probably felt like they
wouldn't be welcome. And I'm sure during those
days, still, there was an element within many of
our white churches that didn't feel that they
really wanted black people to come. At the other
end, there were also some people that would have
been very happy for them to come. It was part of the
change. And of course, it didn't take place
overnight. Still, it's not taking place, sadly
enough. So you said that there's an element that
really didn't want the blacks in the church. How
did those individuals justify the segregation? I
don't think they had any way to justify it except
Through their own prejudice, of course, as you may
be aware, there are some people who take certain
portions of the Scripture and say, here's a
justification for it. But I personally do not
believe that there's any justification of
Scripture for it. And I think most white
Christians realize that there's not. What was
their biblical and scriptural justification for
that? They probably went back to the Old
Testament, for instance, after the flood and the
stories, the accounts of the sons of Noah, Ham,
Shem, and Japheth, and their son who say that one of
those was probably black or was the forerunner of
the black race. I don't think there's any
justification for that at all in scripture. So
they say that either Ham, Shem, or Japheth was a
black? Or was the forerunner of the black race. I
don't know how in the world they would justify that
one of the boys was black and the other one weren't.
Right. Have you ever encountered
a belief that Jesus was, you know, perhaps of
darker color or of, you know, you always see him
pictured with the long hair and the, you know,
blonde and blue eyes, but have you ever
encountered a belief that, you know, maybe Jesus
was of darker skin?
on blue eyes. Most of the pictures or concepts that
I've had since I was a boy was that he had dark hair
and dark eyes and probably an olive complexion,
certainly not a real white complexion like you
might expect people from northern parts of the
world to have, but rather dark complected. But I
never had thought of him, you know, until recent
years as being black. And I'm not sure there's any
justification for his being black any more than
there was for him being real white, colored white,
or with blue eyes and blonde hair. Right.
In the 1960s, there were many demonstrations,
riots, and violent attacks. Did you ever deal with
any riots, demonstrations, or attacks? No, I was
never in a community or a situation where that
occurred when I was present. Were there any other
churches in the area that had problems with race
relations? Not that I'm aware of, no. OK. How were
the churches funded at that time? Was it mainly
through donations? The Southern Baptist Church
is where I was pastor. Yes, free will offerings as
they had been for years and still are. Right. What
effect do you think the lower economic position of
minorities had on their position in the church? I
think it may have had some effect. Southern
Baptists years ago were primarily a low economic
people. That has changed through the years and now
we have become more middle income and even in some
cases higher income. And I think Southern
Baptists have probably for several decades now,
to their own detriment, neglected lower income
people, not just black, but whites and others as
well. But I do think that that has had some effect in
the racial area also, because oftentimes racial
minorities are in the lower economic end of the
spectrum. I know when I was pastor in Victoria,
that I made an effort to try to enlist some Hispanic
families in our church, primarily by trying to
enlist their children to begin with. I would
oftentimes go and pick up the boys and girls and
bring them to church for several Sundays, and then
find one of our church families who would take my
place and begin to go by and pick up the children and
try to cultivate those families.
As it is evident in just about all walks of life, not
just in the religious area of life, human beings
have a way of sort of dividing themselves
according to socioeconomic groups. And that has
happened in the church. And it's sad because I feel
like the church ought to be open not only to all
people of all races, but also all people of all
economic stratus. How did the families of those
children feel when a white pastor was taking their
kids to church? Did you ever encounter any
conflict? No, no. In fact, they were very
appreciative. And occasionally, one of those
parents would visit the church. We were never
really very successful in reaching entire
families. But some of those children remained in
the church and grew up and finished high school and
were young adults in the church and were still
there. So how do you feel that that affected the
integration of the church? I think it helped some.
But by and large, there still has not been an across
the board integration in most of our churches even
today. And I think part of the fault of that lies on
both sides, both minorities as well as the
majority. When you said that you feel that today
the church has neglected some of the lower
socioeconomic positions, In what ways do you
mean? Well, I think it's a fairly well established
fact that most people join themselves together in
social groups. And oftentimes, the basis of those
social groups is economic income. And I feel that
Baptists have moved up the ladder in income. And as
they have, for the most part, moved up the ladder,
they have sometimes forgotten where they have
come from in earlier years if they were on the lower
part of the economic ladder. And I think Baptists
are beginning to realize that now, Southern
Baptists are, and are beginning to try to do more to
reach out into communities to lower income people
and try to reach them for Christ, better than we
were doing, say, a decade or two ago. What
accounted for the rise in socioeconomic status?
Oh, I think an increase in education, for one
thing, would have contributed to it, plus the
experience of one family desiring their children
to to be better off than they were. You oftentimes
hear about that. I don't want my kids to go through
what I had to go through. And so there was an
elevation in terms of livelihood, income,
education. And these things all tended to
elevate, I think, the people. Do you think that the
socioeconomic position of the Southern Baptist
has risen at a different rate than that of other
denominations? No, not really so. I think the same
things happened to Methodists, Presbyterians,
and others as well. Okay. At the time when there
were segregated churches, what were the
differences between the services in minority
churches as opposed to white churches? Well, not
just what were the differences then, but there are
still differences today. Hispanic people, black
people, I'm sure the same thing is true of Asian
people because while in Texarkana, our church
sponsored two Vietnamese families and helped
them to get settled down over here. Culture,
tradition,
both have an effect on the type of worship that
people have, not only in this country but other
countries as well. And I think it becomes evident
when you travel to other countries and realize
that even for Baptists in other countries, they
are not exactly the same as they are here in the
States. The same thing is true in the black culture
here or in the Hispanic culture. There are things
that have been handed down through their
families. There are traditions. There are
folkways. they enter into ours as well. And they
make differences in the approach in the black
churches. Their services, I would say, for those
that I have visited in and I have preached in black
churches on occasion, their worship is somewhat
freer.
I wish sometimes that our white people could,
and in being vocal about their faith and in
praising the Lord. I know I've served in missions
in Africa overseas, too. And I see something of
that in the black people in Africa that certainly
has been brought over into the black people here.
And there are a lot of good things in all of those
cultures that each one of our different cultures
could probably benefit from if we share it more
often. Okay. When you did preach in the black
churches, how were you receptive there? Oh, very
well. I loved preaching in black congregations.
They are usually more responsive than our white
people are to preaching. And
there is not such a sense of time in having to get
through as there is in our white congregations
also. Why do you think that is? What accounts for
those differences? Well, I don't know. I think
partly it's their background. Their lifestyle is
a bit different. They're not rushed. I think our
white people so oftentimes talk, goes back partly
to the economic thing. You know, we're so busy.
Sometimes we've been busy making money and
building successful businesses and so on like
that. that has not taken hold of the black
community or maybe the Hispanic community. It
probably will in succeeding generations. I
expect there will be a repetition of what's
happened to our own white people in this country in
those areas too as time goes on. When was the first
time that minorities assumed a leadership role
within the church? I'm not sure the question that
you're asking. I don't think that minorities have
assumed a leadership position. You're talking
about the denomination or a local church? Yes, in
the church, in the Son of Baptist Church. Okay, the
Son of Baptist Convention. Let's talk about the
convention. Yes. Because that would be
different. Well, there are both blacks and
Hispanics who have assumed some leadership
positions in Southern Baptist circles in recent
years. For instance, in Texas Baptist circles,
there is a black department in our Texas Baptist
convention now. And there is a Hispanic Baptist
convention in Texas has been for a number of years.
And so leadership roles have been assumed for, oh,
I'd say the last 10 to 20 years more so than in the
past. Now the local church, I really can't speak to
that because I've not been in a church where there
were leaders in the local congregation from the
minority groups. When you're talking about the
Hispanic Baptist Convention and the Black
Circle, is that all part of the Southern Baptist
Convention? Does that fall under their
jurisdiction? No, I was talking primarily about
the Texas Baptist Convention, which is totally
independent of the Southern Baptist Convention.
Baptist government is a little bit different from
other denominations.
It really begins with the most power being exerted
in the local congregation and the state and the
Southern Baptist Convention actually
all of the local congregations. Okay. How would
you characterize race relations in other
denominations as compared to the Southern
Baptists?
I really don't know that much about the of the other
mainline denominations that they have proceeded
a bit more rapidly than Southern Baptists have, to
my chagrin. But I don't know actually on a local
basis how much that is true. Which denominations
do you think progress the fastest and the slowest?
I think Southern Baptists have been altogether
slower than they should have been. other
denominations that perhaps have moved faster.
Maybe the perhaps Christian church, maybe the
Methodist and Presbyterians have moved faster
than we have, though I'm not sure of that. Okay.
When the integration did occur, how did the white
members of the church respond to this acceptance
of minorities in the church? Was there any
instance when the churches became more
integrated where white members, you know, quit
the church? I'm sure there have been cases where
integrations occur where probably white members
pulled out of the church because they were opposed
to it. I've not been pastor where that has
happened, but I've heard of instances where it has
happened. When you were in Victoria and the one
black member, Was she already in the church when
you arrived there? No, she joined after I was
there. And there was no conflict in the church? No
problem. Did the minority members participate in
all aspects of the church life? Well, in that case,
you're speaking about just one, of course. And no,
she participated primarily just on Sunday
morning and was active in the church choir. OK. As
it became more integrated, did minorities in
general, speaking in general about this church,
did they assume a role in all aspects of the church
life? Or were they limited in their scope to, say,
just Sunday mornings? No. I think now, speaking
from the standpoint of the convention and not a
local church, that they have increasingly had
some influence, and I think that will grow from now
on, that there's going to be an increasing
influence among minorities in the Southern
Baptist Convention. Okay. I was told that some
people believed during the 60s and really earlier
than the 60s that minorities, in particular
blacks, did not have souls. What was your
experience as far as encountering this belief? I
never encountered that. I doubt that very many
people believed that. At what point during the
Civil Rights Movement did the church change from
being segregated to being integrated, or do you
think there was not just one pivotal incident? No,
I don't think there was a pivotal incident because
the civil rights laws that came about really did
not affect the church so much as it did public
governmental agencies and so on like that,
schools and
stores, businesses, and so on like that. But I
think it is happening gradually. I think it has
still not happened in many, many of our churches.
And hopefully, as the years go by, it will happen
more often. You were talking about the dynamics of
the government and the Southern Baptist
Convention. So would you say that the change will
have to occur more from a bottom-up standpoint or
more from a top-down? I think it occurred more from
a top-down, and I think it should have occurred
more from a bottom-up, but it didn't. Can you
explain on that a little more? I think the churches
should have taken the lead in being more open to the
minorities from a Christian perspective. from
the perspective of, you know, that they were all
God's children. And the color of skin didn't
really make a difference to the Lord. It shouldn't
make a difference in his churches. And I think that
the churches should have, and I still think they
should. It's a very difficult area, though. It
still is today, a very difficult area. But I think
people are realizing more and more their
responsibility and are more and more open Did the
church ever change its doctrine and move towards
integration? I cannot recall Southern Baptist
churches changing any doctrine, no. Do you
remember any incidents at all that significantly
affected the church and its move towards
integration? As a denomination, I think the civil
rights laws did affect it. it made it begin to think
more and more about the fact that
segregation enforced was really not right. Of
course, you can't make people go where they don't
want to go, whether they're white, black,
Hispanic, Asiatic, or any others. But there was
really not the freedom and the openness to go. that
there should have been and that there still needs
to be. Were the seminaries, like Southwestern and
Fort Worth, was that an integrated seminary? Yes,
yes. There were not many black students when I was
there, but there were some. There were Hispanics
that were there. And increasingly, of course,
there have been students from other races that
were there. In the seminary, of course, we studied
race relations in ethics courses and so on. So were
there any segregated seminaries at the time?
I do not know. There may have been, but I doubt that
any of our Southern Baptist seminaries were
segregated at the time. I think they were open.
Okay. How would you... characterize in general
the race relations in the church today?
I still think it's got a long ways to go. I still
think there are people who
have a great deal of prejudice. I see that being
broken down more and more, and I think that's a good
sign. Part of the problem is, and we discussed a
little while ago, is that the type of services are
different. And I think oftentimes Hispanic
people prefer their own type service. Black
people prefer their own type service. White
people prefer theirs. But I think there's a
richness in all of these backgrounds,
traditions, if you would call them that, that all
of them could benefit from some. For the most part,
I think people want to go with their on so-called
racial group, but I think all the churches ought to
be open to those people who might not want to and who
might want to participate or be active in any other
racial group. Okay. What portion of Southern
Baptist churches today would you say are
integrated? Matt, I really don't have any idea. I
don't know. I would say probably Less than half of
them are still integrated, maybe more than that.
But in the local area, I've served only in the
states of Texas and Arkansas. And of course,
Sotheby's Convention encompasses all of the
states of the United States. And how prevalent
integration is, I'm sure it's more so in the
northeast in our churches and probably in the far
west than it still is in the old south. But to what
degree, I don't know. If half of our churches are
integrated, I would be surprised. Hopefully,
more than half of them would be open to integration
if people of other races came. So what effect do you
think geographic barriers have on that
segregation, as opposed to just the mindsets of
the people there? Oh, I think geography has
something to do with mindsets, too. I think
they're interrelated, of course. And in the
South, segregation has been more difficult,
although there are many instances up north of
racial problems that are just as severe as they are
in the South, too. I think there's a growing
awareness in the South, which might be thought of
as the stronghold of segregation there. There's
still a lot of people, I'm sure, who are very
bitterly prejudiced. But gradually, I do think it
is changing. Well, that concludes all my
questions. Is there anything else you'd like to
add about anything? No, nothing that I know of,
Matthew. I've enjoyed talking with you, and I hope
it helps. Well, I appreciate your time, and thank
you very much.